International
International Academic
Science Bee
Competitions
Welcome to the International Science Bee!
1.
There are two main types of cells: prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Prokaryotes are unicellular (one
cell) organisms that lack a nucleus or membrane-bound organelles. Eukaryotes are multicellular
organisms that contain a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles.
2.
Cells are composed of organelles, which are structures that help assist the cell with its various
functions. All cells contain a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, vacuoles and ribosomes.
3.
The nucleus is where DNA is stored in eukaryotic cells.
4.
The mitochondria is an organelle that generates chemical energy in the form of ATP (adenosine
triphosphate) to power the cell's biochemical reactions.
5.
The Golgi body, or Golgi apparatus, is a stack of flat membranous sacs derived from the
endoplasmic reticulum that act as the "post office" of the cell. It receives proteins, lipids, and other
molecules from the endoplasmic reticulum and separates, modifies, and packages these materials
into vesicles that are transported to other parts of the cell.
6.
Chloroplasts are organelles found primarily in plants and are the site of photosynthesis.
7.
Mitosis is a process of nuclear division in which a cell is divided into two identical daughter cells.
This process requires the doubling of a cell's DNA so that each resulting cell has a copy of the
genetic information.
8.
While mitosis produces two identical daughter cells, in order for sexual reproduction to occur,
haploid cells (also called gametes) must be produced from diploid cells in a process called Meiosis.
9.
Cellular Respiration is a set of reactions that occurs in cells that convert chemical energy from
food and nutrients into energy in the form of ATP, the energy currency of the cell.
10. Photosynthesis is a process used by plants to convert carbon dioxide, water and light energy into
glucose and oxygen and is often considered the opposite to cellular respiration. The two main
stages of photosynthesis are the Calvin Cycle and Light Dependent Reactions.
11. In the Calvin cycle, carbon dioxide is fixed to ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) to eventually form
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, a major building block of glucose and many other molecules. In the
process, ATP and NADPH from the light reactions are used up.
12. Bacteria are single-cell organisms that can be found throughout Earth. Bacteria are notable through
reproducing using binary fission, a form of asexual reproduction. Common strains of bacteria
include Escherichia coli (E.Coli), Salmonella, and staphylococcus aureus.
13. E. Coli is a rod-shaped gut-residing bacteria from the Escherichia genus.
14. Antibiotics are often used against bacteria but the rising problem of antibiotic resistance has lead
to the issue of "superbugs". Penicillin is the first commercial antibiotic, derived from a type of mold
and accidentally discovered by Alexander Fleming.
15. Viruses are noncellular infectious particles composed of a protein capsid and genetic material,
either DNA or RNA. Viruses have no metabolic processes and are therefore not considered living.
16. HIV is a virus that weakens the immune system and leads to AIDS. The retrovirus infects helper T
cells of the immune system.
17. Vaccines are often used to help prevent diseases caused by viruses by injecting weakened forms
of the virus into the human body to build up an immune response.
18.
Tundra encompasses the vast treeless plains of the arctic region. It is characterized by extremely
cold temperatures and permafrost (permanently frozen subsoil).
19.
Deserts are characterized by the lack of water and are usually found around specific latitudes that
have descending masses of warm, dry air that create this dry climate.
20. Tropical forests (or rainforests) occur along the equator and are home to nearly half of the species
on earth. This biome is characterized by the high amounts of rainfall, the wet and dry season, and
the structurally complex trees.
21. Taiga biome can be found in the mountains of the Northern Hemisphere. No permafrost is present
but these regions typically receive heavy snowfall during the winter. Coniferous forests characterize
the biome.
22. Genes are the functional unit of heredity. In Mendel's experiments, "genes" that Mendel
investigated were flower color and plant height.
23. Gregor Mendel was an Austrian monk who discovered the fundamental mechanism by which traits
are inherited through his rigorous experimentation with pea plants.
24. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), is the genetic information for all organisms and helps code all
functions and structure. DNA is made up of subunits called nucleotides, that each consist of a
phosphate group, 5-carbon sugar (deoxyribose) and one of four nitrogenous bases (adenine,
thymine, guanine cytosine). DNA has a double helix structure that consists of two strands
running opposite to each other.
25. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins, and consist of a central carbon that has an amine
group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen, and an R group attached to it.
26. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is another important biological molecule. Unlike DNA, ribonucleic acid is
made up of a 6-carbon ribose sugar and consists of different nitrogenous bases (uracil, adenine,
guanine, cytosine).
27. Genetic mutations result from defects in the chromosomes or changes in the normally occurring
DNA sequence, which can result in fatal genetic disorders such as Down Syndrome (extra
chromosome-21) and sickle cell anemia (valine replaces glutamic acid).
28. Evolution is defined as the change in heritable (acquired) characteristics of species over multiple
generations.
29. In 1859, Charles Darwin published "On the Origin of Species" where he outlined his theory of
evolution by natural selection. Darwin is famous for his experiments aboard the HMS Beagle,
where he observed 13 different varieties of finches while in the Galapagos islands.
30. Natural selection is the differential reproductive success of members of a species based on
differences in phenotype (characteristics). The mechanism of natural selection can also be
explained by the phrase "survival of the fittest", where the best characteristics are "automatically"
selected and passed on to the next generation of species.
31. Kingdom is the highest taxonomic rank and includes the following classifications: Animalia,
Plantae, Fungi, Protista, Archaea, and Bacteria.
32. Fungi is a kingdom of organisms which are primarily decomposers, like mushrooms.
33. Phylum is the next classification after Kingdom and some important phyla include chordata
(organisms with a notochord), Porifera (sponges), Cnidaria (jellyfish, corals, anemones),
Nematoda (roundworms), and Arthropoda (arachnids, crustaceans, insects).
34. Non-vascular plants, examples of which include mosses, hornworts, liverworts, and some forms of
algae, are characterized by their lack of vascular tissue (a tissue that helps transport nutrients) and
structures like the root, leaves, and stems.
35. Vascular plants, examples of which include trees, shrubs, and flowering plants, are characterized
by the presence of vascular tissue.
36. Gymnosperms, which are a class of vascular plants, are plants that produce seeds that are not
enclosed in a specialized chamber.
37. Angiosperms, which are a class of vascular plants, are plants that produce flowers and seeds that
are enclosed in a specialized chamber (fruit). Like gymnosperms, they also follow an alternation of
generations reproduction pattern.
38. Leaves are green part of a plant that will change colors and fall off of trees in colder seasons. They
are the site of concentrated chloroplasts that perform photosynthesis.
39. Roots are structures that are specially adapted to maximize the uptake of water when water enters
the xylem through roots via osmosis.
40. Invertebrates are organisms that lack a backbone and examples of invertebrates include insects,
jellyfish, and worms.
41. Mollusks are characterized by a muscular foot, a soft body, and a mantle that produces a shell.
Mollusks obtain calcium carbonate from the seawater in order to deposit their shell, which is used
for protection.
42. Arthropods are characterized by a segmented body, a chitinous exoskeleton, and paired-jointed
appendages. Arthropod appendages include antennae, mouthparts, and legs. Examples of
arthropods include crustaceans, insects, arachnids, chilopods, and diplopods.
43. Cnidarians are characterized by their radial symmetry and presence of a specialized cell called a
cnidocyte that is used for predation and defense. Examples of cnidarians include jellyfish, sea
anemones, and coral.
44. The main objective of the digestive system is to digest food. There are many organs involved in
digestion. The esophagus then carries food and liquid down to the stomach. Stomach is an organ
that secretes gastric juice to break down food received from the esophagus. It uses hydrochloric
acid to chemically breakdown food to obtain nutrients.
45. Calories is the unit used to count energy intake by food.
46. The respiratory system, which consists of organs like the lungs, nose, mouth, and trachea is
responsible for keeping us breathing. This is done through taking in oxygen and removing carbon
dioxide.
47. The nervous system is responsible for all of our conscious and unconscious thoughts, actions, and
perceptions, and functions as the control center of our body. The central nervous system consists
of two parts, the brain and the spinal cord. Neurons are cells that make up the spinal cord and
brain.
48. The cardiovascular system, which is also known as the circulatory system, consists of the heart
and is in charge of transporting oxygen and nutrients to the entire body. Heart is an organ that
circulates blood throughout the body.
49. Skin is the largest organ in the human body. The dermis and epidermis are part of the skin.
50. Livers are organs that produces bile, detoxifies blood, and becomes inflamed in hepatitis.
51. Kidneys are bean-shaped organs that filter blood to produce urine.
52. Parasites are organisms that target hosts to gain benefits, examples of which include tapeworms
and leeches.
53. Malaria is an infectious disease spread by female Anopheles mosquitoes.
54. An atom is made up of protons, neutrons, and electrons and is the smallest unit of matter that
can form a chemical element.
55.
Protons, which have a positive charge and a mass of 1 amu (atomic mass unit) are located at the
nucleus, or center of the atom.
56. Neutrons, which have no charge and a mass of 1 amu are also located at the nucleus.
57. Electrons, which have a negative charge and negligible mass are found in clouds outside the
nucleus.
58. The atomic number of an atom represents the number of protons in the atom. Elements in the
periodic table are arranged by their atomic number.
59. A molecule is a group of two or more elements held together by chemical bonds.
60. A covalent bond is formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms.
61. An ionic bond is formed by the attraction of oppositely charged ions in a process known as
ionization. An ionic bond is formed when one atom completely transfers one or more electrons to
another atom.
62. Hydrogen bonds are weak bonds that result from the attraction of the partially positive hydrogen
on one molecule and the partially negative atom (only forms between nitrogen, oxygen or fluoride)
on another molecule.
63. The Periodic Table, which was invented by Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, is a display that
aims to organize known elements into a table by factors like atomic mass and chemical reactivity.
The current periodic table is organized in order of increasing atomic number, with horizontal rows
called periods and vertical columns called groups. Elements in the same group (ex. Halogens,
alkali earth metals) have the same chemical properties.
64. Hydrogen (H) is the lightest and most abundant element and consists of a single proton and
electron. Hydrogen has atomic number 1.
65. Helium (He) is an element with atomic number 2 and is a colorless and inert gas. Helium is part of a
group of elements called the noble gases and has a very low boiling and melting point.
66. Oxygen (O) is an element with atomic number 8 and is essential for functions like respiration and is
a byproduct of photosynthesis. The compound water consists of two hydrogen atoms bonded to an
oxygen atom. Allotropes of oxygen include ozone (O3).
67. Nitrogen (N) is an element with atomic number 7. Earth's atmosphere consists mostly of nitrogen.
68. Mercury (Hg) is an element with atomic number 80. Mercury is the only metal to be a liquid at room
temperature and was formerly used in many devices such as thermometers and barometers.
69. Sulfur (S) is an element with atomic number 16. The most common form of elemental sulfur, which
exists as a yellow solid, is the S8 (octasulfur) molecule. Compounds containing sulfur include sulfur
dioxide (SO2), which is used for sterilizing fruit and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which is used to mark
dangerous gases.
70. Iron (Fe) is a metal with atomic number 26 that is the primary component of steel.
71. Carbon (C) is an element with atomic number 6 and has the ability to make four covalent bonds.
Due to this property, carbon has the ability to make different allotropes such as diamond, graphite,
and fullerenes. Organic chemistry is the study of carbon-containing molecules. Carbon-14, an
isotope of carbon, is commonly used to date ancient artifacts and fossils due to its predictable
mechanisms of radioactive decay.
72. Lithium (Li) is an element with atomic number 3. lons of Lithium are frequently used in rechargeable
batteries found in phones and laptops.
73. Gold (Au) is an element with atomic number 79.
74. Uranium (U) is an element with atomic number 92. Uranium-238, the most common isotope of
uranium, is used to date ancient volcanic rocks as it decays into lead-206. Uranium-235, another
isotope of uranium, is used to fuel nuclear reactors. Aluminum is a metal with chemical symbol Al
and atomic number 13.
75. Aluminum (AI) is the most abundant metal found in the lithosphere.
76. Calcium (Ca), which is part of a group of elements called the alkaline earth metals, has atomic
number 20. The calcium ion is released during muscle contraction and can be found in teeth and
bones.
77. Silicon (Si), which is part of the Group 14 elements, is an element with atomic number 14. Silicon
has various industry applications, such as transistors, computer chips and solar cells.
78. Phosphorus (P), which is part of the Group 15 elements, is an element with atomic number 15.
White, red, and black phosphorus are all allotropes of phosphorus, which is commonly found
existing as phosphate in rock.
79. Water (H20) is a compound composed of one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms.
80. Carbon Dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas which is released by the burning of fossil fuels.
81. Coal is a combustible, sedimentary black rock used as a fuel source. Anthracite and bituminous are
considered higher quality of coal whose lower quality forms include lignite and peat.
82. Alloys are mixtures of a metal and another substance. Steel and Bronze are example of an alloy.
83. A solid is a substance with a fixed volume and shape. Examples of solids include ice, rock, wood,
and metal.
84. A liquid is a substance that has fixed volume but not shape. Examples of liquids include water, milk,
and blood.
85. A gas is a substance that has no fixed volume and no shape. Examples of gases include air, water
vapor, and helium.
86. Plasma is the final state of matter and consists of a gas of ions. Plasma is the most abundant state
of matter and examples include lightning and solar wind.
87. An endothermic reaction is a type of reaction where the products are higher in energy than the
reactants. Heat is absorbed from the surroundings in an endothermic reaction, causing a positive
change in enthalpy.
88. An exothermic reaction is a type of reaction where the reactants are higher in energy than the
reactants. Heat is released from the surroundings in an exothermic reaction, causing a negative
change in enthalpy.
89. Evaporation is the change from liquid to gas. Evaporation is an endothermic process, as heat is
absorbed during the process. An example of evaporation is the steam rising from the top of a coffee
cup when heated.
90. Melting is the change from solid to liquid. Melting is an endothermic process, as heat is
absorbed during the process. An example of melting is an ice cube melting in liquid water.
91. Freezing is the opposite of melting and is the change from liquid to solid. Freezing is an
exothermic process, as heat is used up during the process. An example of freezing is water
turning into ice.
92. Condensation is the opposite of evaporation and is the change from gas to liquid. Condensation
is an exothermic process, as heat is used up in the process. An example of condensation is
fogging a mirror after a hot shower.
93. Boiling occurs when a liquid is heated to its boiling point, which is defined as the point at which
the vapour pressure of the liquid is equal to the pressure exerted on the liquid by the surrounding
atmosphere. This causes the liquid to become vaporized due to the continuous heating.
94. Sublimation is the change from solid to gas directly without passing through the liquid phase. An
example of sublimation is dry ice, which is usually found as a gas.
95. Pressure is defined as the perpendicular force on an object per unit area. Pressure is measured in
units of force (F) per unit area (A). The force exerted by the atmosphere at sea level is 14.7 pounds
per square inch (psi), or 1 atmosphere (atm).
96. Avogadro's law states that at constant temperature and pressure, the volume of a gas is directly
proportional to the number of moles of gas.
97. Acids are molecules or compounds that have a pH less than 7.
98. Bases are molecules or compounds that have a pH greater than 7.
99. The pH scale, which ranges from 1 (very acidic) to 14 (very basic) is used to measure the acidity of
a solution.
100. Catalysts act by lowering the activation energy of the reaction but are not consumed during the
reaction. Enzymes are a type of biological catalyst.
101. Entropy is the amount of disorder within a compound.
102. The first law of thermodynamics states that the change in internal energy is equal to the amount
of heat added minus the amount of work done by the system.
103. The second law of thermodynamics states that the total entropy of a system and surroundings
will never decrease.
104. Silicates are a family of minerals consisting of silicon and oxygen. Feldspar, quartz, and zeolites ar
some examples of common silicates.
105. Non-silicates are the other family of minerals and contain neither silicon or oxygen. Non-silicate
minerals include carbonates (minerals containing CO32-), sulfates (minerals containing SO42-),
sulfides (minerals containing sulfur), oxides (minerals containing oxygen), and halides (minerals
that are salts of the halogen acids)
106. Crystals are a solid material in which atoms are arranged in a definite and structured pattern.
Examples of crystals include diamond (crystal carbon), quartz, and snowflakes.
107. The Mohs Hardness Scale is a quantitative scale used to identify different minerals by comparing
the resistance of a mineral to being scratched by ten reference minerals on a scale of 1-10.
108. Igneous rocks are one of the three types of rocks and are formed by the cooling and solidification
of magma.
109. Felsic rocks are igneous rocks that are rich in elements that form quartz and feldspar. The most
common felsic rock is granite. Obsidian is another felsic rock, and is formed when lava from a
volcano cools rapidly with little crystal growth. Pumice is a third type of felsic rock and is a light
colored rock that contains volcanic glass.
110. Mafic rocks are igneous rocks that are rich in elements like magnesium and iron. The most
common mafic rock is basalt.
111. Sedimentary rocks are formed through the accumulation or deposition of organic particles on
Earth's surface.
112. Metamorphic rocks are rocks that have undergone a transformation from their original igneous or
sedimentary state. Slate is a type of metamorphic rock that is formed from shale under low
pressure and temperature conditions.
113. Radiometric Dating is a method for determining the age of materials such as rock or carbon
through looking at the decay of radioactive isotopes.
114. Carbon-dating is a way to determine the age of an object by looking at the radioactive decay of
carbon-14. The half-life is the amount of time (usually years) it takes for half an isotope to decay
into another different isotope.
115. The Precambrian Era was the period of time from when Earth formed until the Cambrian period.
During this period of time, the solar system began to form, continental landmass began to emerge,
and we see the emergence of the first bacteria and multicellular organisms.
116. The Paleozoic Era is one of the three geologic eras of the Phanerozoic Eon and is divided into six
geologic periods. During this period of time, there was an explosion in marine organisms. The
Paleozoic Era ended with the Permian extinction, the largest extinction event in the history of the
earth.
117. The Mesozoic Era is the second of the three geologic eras of the Phanerozoic Eon and is divided
into three geologic periods (Triassic, Jurassic Cretacious). This period of time was characterized by
the presence of dinosaurs and the break-up of supercontinent Pangea.
118. The Triassic Period was the first of three periods in the Mesozoic Era. The Carnian Pluvial Event
occurred during this period of time which resulted in a drastic change in global climate. This period
saw the breakup of Pangea into Laurasia and Gondwana.
119. The Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) Mass Extinction, was an event that resulted in the extinction of the
dinosaurs and 80 percent of all species of animals. There is speculation regarding the cause of the
K-T Mass extinction but prominent explanations include the Alvarez hypothesis (asteroid theory).
120. The Holocene Epoch is the current geological epoch. This period is characterized by the growth
and evolution of the human species.
121. Plate Tectonics - Continental drift was a theory proposed by Alfred Wegener that explained
how the continents on Earth shifted places. The theory explains that continents have "drifted"
across Earth's surface, and have moved over geologic time in relation to each other. Evidence that
supports this theory includes fossil records and rock formations.
122. The Mid-ocean ridge is a type of mountain system in the seafloor formed through tectonic plates.
123. Seafloor Spreading is a process that occurs at mid-ocean ridges. In this process, tectonic plates
split apart from each other to form a new oceanic crust.
124. The lithosphere is the outermost rocky layer of the Earth, and is made up of the crust and portions
of the upper mantle. The lithosphere is composed of felsic rock and is very cool.
125. The Mantle is a layer of the earth above the outer core and below the crust. "Plumes" in this region
may drive its convection which causes seafloor spreading.
126. Tectonic plates are pieces of the lithosphere and consist of oceanic and continental crust. Events
like earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain formation occur at boundaries where tectonic plates
meet (faults).
127. A Divergent boundary is a structure that exists when two tectonic plates are moving away from
each other. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is an example of a divergent plate boundary.
128. Convergent boundaries are structures that exist when two tectonic plates come towards each
other. The impact of the collision between the plates causes the edges of the plates to either buckle
up into a mountain range or bend down into a seafloor trench. The Pacific Ring of Fire is an
example of a convergent plate boundary.
129. A transform boundary is formed when two plates slide past each other. An example of a transform
boundary is the San Andreas fault zone.
130. Continental crust is the outermost layer of the lithosphere and helps make up our continents and
all of Earth's land surfaces.
131. Oceanic crust is also the outermost layer of the lithosphere and helps make up the surface of our
oceans. Oceanic crust is thinner than continental crust.
132. Subduction zones are locations found at convergent plate boundaries where the lithosphere sinks
into the mantle and is recycled. At this point, the heavier plate dives beneath the second lighter
plate and sinks into earth's mantle.
133. An earthquake is a natural disaster that results in the sudden shaking of the earth due to the
collision of tectonic plates or volcanic eruptions. The epicenter is the point where an earthquake
originates, and is located directly above the focus or hypocenter, which is a region inside Earth's
crust.
134. When an earthquake occurs, two types of seismic waves are produced. P waves travel the fastest
and are longitudinal waves which can travel through solids and liquids. S waves are slower and are
transverse waves which can travel through solids only.
135. The shadow zone is a region of Earth's surface that does not receive any P waves. Seismographs
are unable to detect earthquakes in this region.
136. The Mercalli Intensity Scale is a scale used to measure the intensity of earthquakes and ranges
from 1 to 12.
137. The Richter Scale is a scale used to measure an Earth's magnitude and ranges from 1 to 9.
138. Clouds are masses of water vapor from which rain is released. Types of clouds include cirrus,
stratus, and cumulonimbus.
139. Jet Streams are rapidly moving bands of air located in the upper atmosphere.
140. Ocean Currents are these large directed flows of water found in the ocean. The Gulf Stream is an
ocean current that flows from North America to Europe.
141. Tornadoes are rapidly spinning winds which typically form during severe thunderstorms.
142. Glaciers are large, moving bodies of ice. They can create fjords by cutting through bedrock.
143. Milky Way galaxy is the galaxy which contains the Solar System.
144. The Sun is the star at the center of our Solar System around which the Earth revolves.
145. Mercury is the smallest and closest planet to the Sun.
146. Venus is the second closest planet to the Sun. Due to sulfuric acid in its atmosphere, Venus has the
highest surface temperature in the solar system. With the naked-eye, it is the brightest planet in the
sky.
147. Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and is often referred to as the Red Planet. Mars has two
moons: Phobos and Deimos.
148. Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System and is known for its Great Red Spot.
149. Saturn is the sixth planet from the sun known for its extensive ring system
150. Pluto is a dwarf planet, which was formerly classified as the ninth planet from the sun. It is
sometimes considered to be a double planet with its largest moon, Charon.
151. Solar Eclipses are astronomical events in which the Sun is at least partially blocked by the Moon.
152. Asteroids are astronomical bodies which make up a namesake "belt" in the solar system.
153. Black Holes are astronomical bodies which have a gravitational singularity so strong that light
cannot escape past their event horizon.
154. Comets are orbiting icy bodies, which include ones named Halle-Bopp and Halley's.
155. Asteroids are astronomical bodies that make up a namesake "belt" in the solar system.
156. Speed of Light (c) is about 300 million meters per second and represents the maximum speed at
which objects can travel.
157. Supernova is an event in which a star explodes.
158. The Big Bang theory is the theory that the universe exploded out from one infinitely dense
singularity.
159. The Apollo Program is a series of missions with astronauts like Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin
going to the moon.
160. Levers are simple machines exemplified by a seesaw. Levers derive more mechanical advantage
from having longer arms, which reduce the amount of force needed to be applied over a longer
distance.
161. Pendulum is a device consisting of a weight suspended from a pivot which swings back and forth.
162. Pulleys are simple machines whose name comes from the action performed on the rope to lift up
an object. It consists of a wheel on a fixed axle with a groove to support a sliding rope.
163. Gravity is the weakest of the fundamental forces, which causes objects to fall to the ground.
164. Electronegativity is the measurement of an atom's ability to attract electrons. It is measured on the
Pauling scale.
165. Mass is a quantity, whose SI unit is the kilogram
166. Voltage is a quantity, symbolized V, which is 120 for U.S. wall outlets and measures the electric
potential difference. It is equal to current times resistance according to Ohm's law.
167. Inertia is the resistance to change in an object's motion, often explained as "An object in motion
will stay in motion."
168. Momentum is the product of mass and velocity, quantification of an object's tendency to stay in
motion.
169. Friction is a force that resists motion. It comes in static, rolling, and sliding forms.
170. X-rays is a form of radiation that can penetrate through soft tissue to image bone.
171. Kinetic Energy is the energy of moving objects. The quantity for an object's kinetic energy is equal
to momentum squared over two times the mass.
172. Photons are quantum particles that carry the electromagnetic force and mediates visible light.
173. Electrical Resistance is a quantity that describes how much a device opposes electric flow. It is
measured in ohms.
174. Electronic Circuits are devices consisting of components that allow electricity to flow.
175. The Ideal Gas law is a law which relates the product of pressure and volume of an ideal substance
to its temperature.
176. Density is equal to mass divided by volume, which can be used to determine if an object floats in
water.
177. Matrix is a mathematical object which is array of numbers in rows and columns.
178. Circle is a 2D shape consisting of all points equidistant from a fixed center. The area of a circle is
calculated by the formula Pi times the radius squared.
179. Standard Deviation is a quantity symbolized "sigma" which represents how spread out a set of
data is from the mean.
180. Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be represented as the quotient of two integers, such
as Pi.
181. Perfect Numbers are numbers which are the sum of their own prime factors.
182. Pi is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter which is approximately 3.14.
183. Factorial is a function symbolized by an exclamation point next to a number. It gives the number of
ways to arrange n distinct objects in a row.
184. Calculus is a branch of mathematics dealing with integration and derivative. It was independent
discovered by Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton.
185. René Descartes is an early modern French philosopher and mathematician, who stated "I think
therefore I am."
186. Stephen Hawking is a British physicist who was confined to a wheelchair due to ALS.
187. Galileo Galilei is an Italian scientist who was condemned by the Inquisition for supporting
heliocentrism.
188. Edwin Hubble is a scientist who names a 1990 space telescope.
189. Thomas Edison is an American inventor, who developed the most popular incandescent light bulb.
190. Alan Turing is an English mathematician, who names a test which can determine if a computer
possesses strong artificial intelligence.
191. Euclid is a Greek mathematician who wrote the Elements and is considered the "father of
geometry."
192. Erwin Schrödinger is an Austrian physician who demonstrated superposition using his namesake
cat.
193. Marie Curie is a Polish scientist who coined the term "radioactivity" and also discovered radium
with her husband, Pierre.
194. Leonhard Euler is a Swiss mathematician from the 18th century who names the transcendental
number e. He discovered the number which serves as the base of the natural logarithm.
195. Johannes Kepler is an astronomer who devised three laws of planetary motion.
196. Archimedes is a Greek mathematician of Syracuse who discovered the principle of buoyancy.
197. Louis Pasteur is a scientist who names a process used to keep milk sanitary. He was the creator of
the rabies and anthrax vaccine invented a process where mild heat is used to remove pathogens.
198. Albert Einstein is a scientist who proposed the famous rest-mass equation E equals m, C squared.
199. Bluetooth, developed by Ericsson, is a technology for wirelessly networking consumer electronics,
named for a 10th century Danish king.
200. Paper is a material made from ground up fiber and cellulose in wood. It was invented by Cai Lun.
