

Based on the extracted table data, here are the converted sentences:

Table 1:

1. Quick decision and courage are essential.
2. Chandrawati regains her [something] after 4 [units].
3. Sakshi regains her health after 6 [units].
4. The three colors of nutrition are [important].
5. Ramkali advocates for a change in food habits.
6. Deepa is a hygiene ambassador.
7. Say no to 'Ghutti' [practice].
8. Rani becomes immunized after 16 [units].
9. A change in Pooja [ritual] is necessary.
10. A clean village is a healthy village.
11. Sheela shows the way to [achieve something].
12. Sewage system and proper roads are [essential].
13. Harsh Kumari's inspired [story] is [inspiring].
14. Sheela is on her way to a better [life].
15. Mini promotes the use of sanitary pads.
16. A war against Anaemia is [necessary].
17. Sangeeta fights for her [right].
18. Saroj fights against child [abuse].
19. Kamla says no to open [defecation].
20. Namisha gets a new life.

Note that some of the sentences may not make complete sense or may require additional context to understand the meaning.Ek Pahal :
Sehat Ki Or
MPHSKP
fhi360
1
HRd
THE SCIENCE OF IMPROVING LIVES
Ukaid
inat
sock
MPTAST
TOT coople
Ek Pahal : Sehat Ki Or
INDEX
Quick decision, courage...
2
Chandrawati regains her
4
Sakshi regains her health
6
The three colors of nutrition
8
Ramkali: Change in food habits
10
Deepa: A Hygiene Ambassador
12
Say No to 'Ghutti'
14
Rani becomes immunization
16
A change in Pooja
18
Clean village, healthy village
20
Rush
Sheela shows the way to
22
Sewage system, proper roads
24
PUBLISHER
Harsh Kumari's inspired
26
Sheela on way to better
28
State Resource Centre, M.P. Indore
MPTAST
Use of sanitary pads: Mini
30
Mahalaxmi Nagar, Sector-R
9C, 9D Paramount Villa
A war against Anaemia
31
Indore - 452 010 (MP)
Shyamla Hills
Tel: 2551917, 2574104
Bhopal - 462 013 (MP)
Sangeeta fights for her
33
Fax: 0731-2551573
Tel: 0755-4039999
Saroj fights against child
35
Fax: 0755-4039900
Kamla says no to open
37
A New life for Namisha
39
FOREWORD
Health is an important component of our development. All sections of society need to join hands to promote healthy
practices and behaviours. "Sanjhi Sehat" is an intervention project to bring about this change. This project was implemented
by Panchayat and Rural Development department and MPTAST in eight districts of the state with support of DFID.
Information on health, nutrition and WASH issues were disseminated and community meetings conducted through
participatory learning and action process. The positive results started coming out very soon. It led to improvement in various
health indicators such as increase in institutional deliveries, adoption of breast feeding practices, reduction in malnutrition,
increased enrolment of children in Aaganwadi centres etc. Besides the nine Indicators of "Sanjhi Sehat", positive change was
also seen in community thinking and behaviour. For example malaria control in community, increase in demand for Janani
Express, increase in demand of nutritious food in Aaganwadis, and increase in awareness about cleanliness leading to
demand for community support in building toilets.
To capture and document the gains and positive experiences, "Sanjhi Sehat, Hamari Kahaniyaan" was initiated. The
success stories about positive behaviour changes were documented in a creative manner by way of "Wall Newspapers"
developed by women themselves and thereafter displayed at public places in the community. These innovative efforts led to
an outpour of success stories from all eight districts. Out of all the success stories, 20 selected stories are being shared through
this booklet "Striding towards better health". However, this is just the beginning of a self-sustaining process in which the
women themselves are spear heading the positive behaviour changes and narrating their success stories in their own words.
We are thankful to Dr. S. Krishnaswami, Team Leader - MPTAST for guiding us in this endeavour to capture the
success stories in the form of this booklet. We are also thankful to the project team: District & block officials, PLA facilitators,
CRPs, SHG women and SRC, Indore team. The stories have been presented in simplified manner by Ms. Sujata N. Sharma.
The centreis thankful to all those who directly and indirectly contributed in development of this booklet.
We hope that you would like "Striding towards better health".
Anjali Agarwal
Director
State Resource Centre, Indore
Panna
Quick decision,
Where there is a will, there is a way. Women can
achieve anything if they want to do SO. Rambai and the
courage paves the way
women of the village proved it through their daring
decisions and action. In Kachhar village of Panna district
there was no tradition of institutional delivery. Although
delivery at home is a life threatening risk for pregnant
women and the newborn, the village women had to face this
risk because of traditional beliefs.
In this situation, the 11th meeting of Sanjhi Sehat
held in Kachhar village paved the way for a new precedent.
In this meeting the villagers were told about importance of
institutional delivery and newborn care following which
helped a change was seen in the mind-set of the villagers.
Rambai had decided that she would get herself
admitted to the hospital. When the time for delivery came,
however, they had to face a serious problem. The main road
to the hospital was about 6 km far away from village and
there was no transport facility. Due to bad road condition
the Janani Express was unable to reach the village. In this
situation it was a great task for the women to take Rambai to
the hospital.
But they did not give up. When they did not get any
transportation to reach the connecting road they put
Rambai in a charpoy (wooden bed) and lifting it on their
shoulders began walking towards the main road. Seeing
women carrying Rambai, the villagers also rushed out and
2
Panna
lent a helping hand. In this way the women finally succeeded in taking Rambai to the connecting road from where the Janani
express took her to the district hospital. There, Rambai delivered a beautiful girl child in the hospital. Both mother and
the
infant are doing fine.
This way the women of kachar village have set an example which has given a boost to institutional deliveries. Women
have made a decision that whatever problems may come but they will not put the lives of pregnant women and the newborn at
risk by having deliveries at home.
3
Dindori
Chandrawati regains
Sarei village is situated in Samnapur block of
Dindori district, approximately 28 kilometers away in a
her health
forest area. Chandrawati lives in Sarie village with her
husband, in-laws and a two year old child. Farming is the
main source of livelihood for the family, with Chandrawati
and her husband both working as agricultural labourers.
With household chores and a full time job to take care of,
Chandrawati could barely manage to find some time for her
small child, but with a second pregnancy on the way, she felt
completely overwhelm end. And it was her own health
which bore the brunt. She could not keep track of her health
and eating habits and due to lack of proper diet and
adequate rest, she started losing weight and becoming
frailer. From a respectable 55 kgs, her weight fell to a fragile
35kgs. Due to weakness, Chandrawati would always feel
tired and dizzy. Her neglect of her own health was
compounded by her husband's and in-laws' inattention to
her health, resulting in Chandrawati becoming weaker day
by day as her pregnancy grew.
It was Sanjhi Sehat PLA Facilitator, Bhajan, who
first noticed Chandrawati's drastic weight loss. He was
making a round of the houses to call the women for a Sanjhi
Sehat meeting. Concerned and worried for her ill health, he
took her to the Anganwadi Centre for getting her weighed.
There the anganwadi worker weighed Chandrawati and it
was revealed that her weight was just 35 kgs. The
Anganwadi worker remarked that this low weight was
4
Dindori
dangerous for her and her baby's health and would cause a big problem during delivery. She recommended Chandrawati to
meet the ASHA of the village. The ASHA worker explained that she should also eat green vegetables and salad in her meal.
Additionally, she advised to rest and gave her iron tablets to take daily with her meals.
15 days later PLA Facilitator Bhajan visited Chandrawati's home and found that there was no improvement in her
health. Bhajan concealed his disappointment and sat down to explain to Chandrawati's husband and mother in law that if they
didn't take care of her diet, she would be at life risk during the time of delivery. Hearing the serious tone of Bhajan, her husband
and mother in law finally woke up to the impending danger of Chandrawati's health and started paying attention.
Chandrawati's mother in law would ensure that she ate a proper meal and took adequate rest. The results started showing.
Within a short span of time, she gained weight and her weight increased to 44 kgs from 35 kgs.
Chandrawati is now out of danger. Chandrawati says that 'everyone tried to help me get out of the danger zone. Bhajan
sent me to Aanganwadi centre and ASHA worker and the Anganwadi worker advised me about antenatal care, medicines and
advice about nutritious diet. The ASHA worker gave me IFA pills. I have not faced any of the difficulties which I encountered in
my first pregnancy. Now I would suggest the same to all other pregnant women that they should take care of their diet, take
advantage of anganwadi and ASHA workers' services and take good care of their health.
5
Barwani
Sakshi regains her health
Shanti was very concerned about the health of her
five-month-old daughter, Sakshi. Sakshi had diarrhea and
due to loose motions, she was becoming weaker day by day.
Shanti had taken her to an Ojha (traditional healer), where
he performed some incantations. But there was no change
for the betterment, instead Sakshi's health was steadily
worsening and she was becoming weaker day by day.
Shanti belongs to a tribal community of Ghusgaon
village in Rajpur block of Barwani district. Her family
includes her husband and her daughter. To boost the family
income, Shanti works as an agricultural labour. Due to her
busy routine, Shanti could not make time to attend the
Sanjhi Sehat meetings on health, nutrition, sanitation &
hygiene, which were being conducted in the village every
month. But the vigilant Community Resource Person
(CRP), Sajan Mohobbat noticed Shanti's ailing daughter
and enquired. He found out that Sakshi had diarrhea and on
probing further found that the infant was not being
exclusively breastfed. Rather she was being given pre-
lacteals, which had caused the loose motions, resulting in
weakness. Shanti had no information about the services
available in Anganwadi Centre and SO she was not able to get
information about health and nutritional requirements of
her daughter. As a last resort, she took her daughter to a
traditional healer, who instead of healing the child,
worsened her condition.
6
Barwani
The CRP asked Shanti to attend at least one meeting of Sanjhi Sehat. On his insistence, Shanti attended a meeting,
in
which they talked about the health of children, facilities provided through anganwadi etc. In the discussion on health of
the
children Shanti asked several questions about the health of her daughter Sakshi; like why she looks SO weak ? Why she gets
ill
frequently, etc. Shanti's questions were discussed in the meeting by all the women attending the PLA cycle. The PLA Facilitator
of Sanjhi Sehat, Usha Sahu told her that it is necessary for the health of her daughter to attend anganwadi programs and take
advantage of facilities made available from time to time as well as consult a doctor if Sakshi does not get well. She asked the
CRP to accompany Shanti and Shakshi to the doctor. With proper treatment, in due course of time, Sakshi's diarrhea, which
happened at frequent intervals, was cured, though she was still weak.
Shanti heaved a sigh of relief when she saw her daughter recovering. She also realized the importance of taking her
child to the anganwadi regularly. According to her, "I realise that every mother should go to anganwadi and get the children
regularly weighed. After the meeting, I and my husband took my daughter to the Aanganwadi and got her weighed. The
Anganwadi worker explained the growth chart and said that Sakshi's health status is in red circle and she is severely
malnourished. It is a life threatening risk for her. The Anganwadi worker suggested to get Sakshi admitted in the NRC. I
told
her that I did not know about NRC. I was afraid of the procedures and expenses of NRC but the CRP and Anganwadi didi
reassured me that all services, including medicines and food are free of cost, including my stay in the NRC with my child."
After the anganwadi worker's advice and CRP's inspiration Shanti admitted her daughter in NRC. There the health
staff took care of Sakshi's health and fed her properly for 14 days of her admission. On admission, Sakshi's weight was 3 kg 640
grams and after the 14" day her weight was 4 kg 186 grams. Before leaving the NRC, the doctor advised them about the diet of
their daughter and asked them to bring Sakshi to NRC for regular check up.
Shanti says that 'had I not gone to the Sanjhi Sehat meeting, I would not have come to know about Sakshi's ailment, nor
the services available at Anganwadi and NRC. Now I regularly visit anganwadi to receive nutritious food in the form of Take
Home Ration from the anganwadi and get her weighed every month. Today, due to timely intervention and Shanti's vigilance,
her daughter, Sakshi has reached the Green patch, from the red, in the growth monitoring chart. She is a healthy, fit and a
playful child.
7
Chhatarpur
The three colors of nutrition
The 14th Sanjhi Sehat meeting held in Shivrajpur
village of Rajnagar block Chatarpur district brought a
turning point in the lives of the villagers. The women were
told about the importance of 'three colours on your plate'.
Once they became convinced about the three-colour
concept in meals, this concept was introduced into the mid
day meal of the schools also in the village.
Various issues of health, hygiene and nutrition are
shared and discussed in the Sanjhi Sehat meetings
organised once every fifteen days at the village level. In the
beginning, Shivrajpur village women did not attend the
Sanjhi Sehat meetings because they were busy in domestic
and field work and they believed that there is no use of
attending such meetings. The PLA Facilitator had to put in
extra efforts to convince the women about the utility of the
meetings. She regularly contacted village women and told
them about nutrition, health and hygiene related problems
and discussed about the importance of attending the
meetings. As a result, the women's participation in the
meetings slowly increased.
The 14th meeting focused on 'Preparing Nutritious
Food' became a very popular session in the village. Almost
all the women in the village attended the meeting. The Mid
day meal worker of schools, Shanti Devi, also participated.
In the meeting the PLA Facilitator discussed about the
importance of nutritious food. It was discussed that women
8
Chhatarpur
and children were undernourished due to insufficient intake of nutritious diet. Shanti Devi asked about the ingredients of a
healthy diet. She was told that a meal which included ingredients of three colours, yellow, red and green, was a complete meal.
Curious participants wondered how this could be done. The PLA Facilitator explained that there are SO many yellow things
which can be added in our food like dal or some yellow vegetables as pumpkin etc. Dal is rich in proteins and pumpkin and
vegetables have several vitamins. Similarly green vegetables and red vegetables and salad like carrot and tomato can be
included to complete tri-colour in their diet. After discussion Shanti Devi asked if she could add these three colours in mid day
meal of the school to make nutritious food for all the students and on being assured that this formula would work, she resolved
to conform to this formula to make all the meals she served in the schools. All participants clapped for Shanti Devi's resolve.
After the meeting, Shanti Devi focused on including tri colour food in the mid-day meals prepared by her. In a few days
she applied this rule in the school meals. It is the impact of this meeting that today children of Shivrajpur are having tri-colour
food, full of protein and vitamin. Village women are also using this method in their food. The villagers have started using green
vegetables, dal and milk as their regular diet. In this way the 14th meeting became a milestone in changing the food habits of the
villagers.
9
Chhatarpur
Ramkali:
Ramkali is a changed woman ever since she changed
her food habits. She goes to the anganwadi and takes
Change in food habits for
suggestions on health and food habits from the anganwadi
worker. She takes iron tablets and tries to get at least three
better health
colour food included in her regular diet, which includes
green vegetables, red salad and yellow lentils (Dal).
33-year-old Ramkali belongs to a tribal community
of Jharkuan village in Bijavar block of Chhatarpur district.
She bears the responsibility of six family members
including two sons, two daughters and her husband.
Unfortunately Ramkali gets no support from her husband
who is not only unemployed but also spends his time
gambling.
Ramkali begins her day at 4 'o' clock in the morning,
cleaning the cow shed, collecting fire wood from the jungle,
cooking for the whole family and then leaving for
Kishanganj, about 4 km away from her village, to sell the
wood. This is the only source of income for her and her
family, with which she meets her family's daily
requirements.
Ramkali had almost forgotten herself in the busy
schedule and neglected her own health and food intake.
Gradually she became weak and anaemic and fell ill. The
Sanjhi Sehat Community Resource Person Shyamrani took
notice of this and advised her to come to the meetings of
Sanjhi Sehat, where she would be able to meet other women
and gain information given on health and nutrition.
10
Chhatarpur
In this way Ramkali started taking out time and going to Sanjhi Sehat's meetings. During the meetings she was
informed about the issues of women's health, nutrition and sanitation and hygiene. Ramkali says - -'In the meetings I came to
know that for good health tri-colour food must be a part of our meals, SO I started having green vegetables, yellow dal and
tomato and carrot as red salad, whenever I could afford it. Otherwise I would depend on economical and locally grown food in
these color groups. The ASHA worker also gave me iron tablets to take daily."
Ramkali's made small changes in the food habits of her family and this was evident in the improvement in her and her
family's health. She regained her health. Earlier she would get tired very soon but now after the change in her diet, she can walk
4 km easily. Issues like dizziness and breathlessness no longer plague her. Ramkali has succeeded in making small changes in
her food habits and has become healthy. This change not only shows in the improvement of her health but in the health of her
children also. Ramkali says, "Around us we have SO many things in our farms on which we do not pay attention. If we take care
and use all nutritional ingredients in our food like green leafy vegetables, fibrous vegetables and sprouts, we can surely
improve our family health.
11
Chhatarpur
Deepa:
Women in Jakhraunkala village of Bijavar block in
Chhatarpur district were not aware of the importance of
A Hygiene Ambassador
menstrual hygiene. Young girls who started their menstrual
cycle were subjected to unhealthy practices in the name of
beliefs and traditions which adversely affected their health.
They were made to use unwashed clothes during menstrual
periods resulting in several diseases. 15-year old Deepa
played the main role in changing this unhealthy tradition in
her village.
Deepa only knew that during periods one should not
do hard work and could use any kind of cloth. Deepa would
also use old cotton cloth during her periods, which she
would wash and hide in a dark corner for reuse during her
next monthly cycle. Due to shame and embarrassment, she
did not wash the cloth properly or dry it in sunshine. In this
condition re-use of this cloth was harmful for her.
Her beliefs changed after the Sanjhi Sehat
Community Resource Person Neena Sen invited her to
participate in the meetings. In this meeting she was told that
one must use clean and dry cotton cloth during menstrual
cycle. After first use, the cloth should be washed with soap or
Neem water and dried in sunlight. Failure to do so, could
risk her health and life. During meeting she was also told
about sanitary napkins made by DPIP.
Once she understood the harmful effects, Deepa
now uses clean cloth and dries it in the sun after washing
12
Chhatarpur
with soap. She stopped reusing old clothes and she started buying sanitary napkins for use. She has become a regular user of
these napkins and disposes them by setting them on fire after use. Deepa purchases these napkins for Rs. 30 from the Gram
Utthan Samiti.
This change in hygiene behaviour was not confined to Deepa alone. She spoke with her school friends about the
importance of hygiene and cleanliness. Now Deepa has become an ambassador of hygiene in her village. She has inspired
many girls and now her classmates including Pooja and Rani have also started using sanitary napkins.
13
Tikamgarh
Say No to 'Ghutti'
Poonam was very happy when she gave birth to a
baby boy. But very soon, her son, now two months old
started catching cold and cough easily. He would often
throw up his mother's milk. Once her baby caught severe
cold and faced difficulty in breathing. Following her
mother-in-law's advice, she gave him ghutti (pre lacteal)
with goat milk twice a day for two days. But after that her
baby started suffering from loose motions and his cold and
cough did not abate. Her mother-in-law said it was quite
normal for small babies to suffer from diarrhoea and that he
would be fine in a day or two. But the baby's loose motions
continued. It was only after the baby was taken to a
doctor, that the loose motions stopped.
Poonam belongs to Vairvar village of Jatara block in
Tikamgarh district. In her family she has eight members
including her husband and in laws. Her family is totally
dependent on agriculture for making their ends meet. They
work as agricultural labour to fulfil their day to day needs.
When Sanjhi Sehat meetings started in the village and she
was invited to attend the meetings, her husband and in laws
discouraged her saying, attending meetings was useless and
sheer wastage of time. She should go for work rather than
attending meeting. But Sanjhi Sehat program CRP always
invited her for meetings following which Poonam began
attending the village meetings. During the sixth meeting
women were told that the mother should feed her baby with
breast milk exclusively for six months. During this period no
14
Tikamgarh
other food should be given be it water or honey. During this discussion when Poonam asked about ghutti, the Sanjhi Sehat PLA
Facilitator told her that ghutti should not be given in any condition during the first six months of the baby. Poonam again
wanted to know then why did her in laws and other elders of the village recommend giving ghutti if it was harmful for a child.'
The PLA Facilitator explained that ghutti is often given as it is a traditional practice but it can cause diarrhoea and infection in
the infant.
When Poonam and the other women present in the meeting heard this, they realized that giving ghutti could be
dangerous for their children. Since then, Poonam decided not to give any type of pre lacteals to her child, not even water till her
son completed six months of age. She said that she will convince other women also to not give ghutti or any other liquid to their
children.
After returning from the meeting Poonam first told her sister in law that she should not give ghutti to her child. Poonam
now has made it her mission to sensitize every woman in her village about the importance of exclusive breast feeding and not
giving any pre lacteals to infants. Due to Poonam's efforts women of Vairvar village are slowly understanding the importance of
breast feeding exclusively in first six months.
15
Panna
Rani becomes
Rani Bai, of Baraho village of Pavai block in Panna
district of Madhya Pradesh was not aware about
immunization ambassador
immunization and its benefits. She always thought
injections were harmful and believed that after
immunization one gets sick. But now the situation has
changed. Rani Bai has not only got herself immunized but
she has turned an ambassador for immunization in her
village. Having overcome all her fears, today Rani Bai
encourages women of her village to get themselves
immunized.
This transformation in Rani Bai came after she
started attending village meetings organised by PLA
Facilitators every fortnight at the village level under the
Sanjhi Sehat programme. PLA Facilitators always try to
gather maximum women in this meeting to spread the
message far and wide. Rani Bai was also invited. Because of
the PLA Facilitator's efforts, many women, including Rani
Bai, attended the meeting in which they discussed health,
nutrition and hygiene issues.
As Rani says, "During my first pregnancy, I had not
got myself immunized. The village Anganwadi worker had
told me about immunization but I ignored all her advice.
When the Sanjhi Sehat meetings were being organized, I
could attend the 13 village meeting in which they discussed
health and immunization issues."
The PLA Facilitator told the women why
immunization was essential for pregnant woman and which
16
Panna
'teeka' a pregnant woman has to get administered. Rani Bai, until then, had been wondering whether immunization would
make her ill SO she asked the PLA Facilitator to clarify. The PLA Facilitator explained to her that immunization was neither
harmful nor caused any illness. But if one ignores immunization he/shecan be in danger zone.
This discussion left a deep impact on Rani Bai and she reached the sub health Centre in her village to get her shots the
very next day. Says Rani Bai, After immunization I neither felt any pain nor became ill. Now I ask every pregnant woman to get
immunized.'
In this way, Rani Bai who had fears about immunization now has become an ambassador of immunization and her
ultimate goal is to encourage pregnant women to get immunized. She has taken up the responsibility to advocate for
immunization not only for pregnant women but infants and children also.
In her daily conversation with village women she does not forget to ask about their immunization status. Rani Bai says:
'I am trying to ensure that all pregnant women and children should get immunized in my village.
17
Sagar
A change in Pooja
Pooja is a health conscious girl, who is very
concerned about her personal health and hygiene habits.
She is fully aware of the need to maintain hygiene
particularly during periods and therefore, she uses sanitary
napkins instead of cloth.
This change in Pooja became possible only after the
17th meeting of Sanjhi Sehat during which all women of the
village who attended the meet were explained in detail the
importance of maintaining hygiene during the menstrual
period.
17-year old Pooja is a resident of Chanuaa village of
Rehli block in Sagar district of Madhya Pradesh. She is a
student of 10th standard and has four siblings. Her periods
started a few years ago. Initially she would use any old
unused cloth as advised by her mother and sister.
Pooja says, 'Use of cloth in menstrual periods is very
risky because after use, we wash and dry this cloth and reuse
it. We wash and dry this cloth in a secluded place in our
homes where there is no sunlight mostly to avoid anyone in
the family particularly men noticing it. Thus the cloth
remains dirty and unhygienic and full of germs, but still we
reuse it.'
Pooja did not know about sanitary napkins until she
attended the 17th meeting of Sanjhi Sehat. She says 'In this
meeting they told about hygiene during menstrual periods.
They explained why one should take special care during
18
Sagar
periods and how hygienic habits were important and also how ignoring hygiene can cause infections. It was then that she
realised hygiene was essential and using old cloth was unhygienic. She decided to switch over to sanitary napkins which was
available in anganwadis.
After this meeting Pooja told her sister about sanitary pads. Her sister was a little hesitant at first and said, 'we have to
pay for pads but we find cloth easily in our homes.' But Pooja argued that if we use cloth to avoid extra money we will have to
spend more money on treatment of diseases caused by use of dirty cloth. Hence it is a wise decision to use pads instead of cloth.'
Pooja says, 'In this meeting they also described about safe disposal of used pads. I did not throw used pads. I burn them
with other waste.'
19
Sagar
Clean village, healthy village
Villagers in Deorikala village of Sagar district
suffered from several health related ailments, which
included vomiting, diarrhoea and stomach problems. The
victims mostly comprised women and children and due to
lack of any government health facility, they had to travel a
long distance to go to block headquarters Kesli to get
themselves treated by a private doctor, in the process, losing
time, energy and money.
When Sanjhi Sehat meetings started in the village,
the main challenge was to free people of illnesses. The first
meeting was organized for the women of the village.
The PLA Facilitators and coordinators went door to
door to talk to the women urging them to attend the
meetings. PLA Facilitators Ranu Rai says, "Women were
hesitant at first but we patiently answered their queries like
what was the meeting about and how it would benefit them."
The PLA Facilitators told them about the diseases that could
spread due to unclean surroundings. Their dialogues and
discussions bore fruit and gradually the villagers opened up
to the meetings. They were now ready to come to the
meetings and start the discussion on women and children's
health and nutrition issues.
The Sanjhi Sehat team toured the village to take
stock of the situation and spotted garbage heaps, filth,
potholes flooded with muddy water all over, people were
consuming water from the hand pumps without filtering it
and without washing their hands.
20
Sagar
These unclean habits had resulted in spread of germs and water borne diseases. When women started attending the
Sanjhi Sehat meetings, they were briefed on its benefits and very soon, the villagers of Deorikala realized how important
cleanliness was. They began a drive by burning garbage heaps, filling potholes with soil etc. The next step was the volunteers
explaining to the villagers how unclean, polluted water was making them ill.
For filtering water they were shown how to use cloth to filter the water and keeping the storage utensils clean. Today,
most of the households filter and store water in clean 'matkas' (earthen pots)
Similarly, they were also told how keeping their hands clean by washing them with soap before cooking and consuming
food and after defecation could prevent SO many stomach ailments. Women, in particular, vowed to adopt this practice thus
leading to the healthy families.
21
Raisen
Sheela shows the way to
Siyarmau, a small village situated 18 km away from
Silvani block of Raisen district of Madhya Pradesh is, today
cleanliness
free of open defecation system, thanks to Sheela. Having no
toilets in their houses, many villagers of Siyarmauhad to use
open spaces as toilet. After attending Sanjhi Sehat meeting
Sheela realized that open defecation was not only
unhygienic but also a slur on women's dignity.
Despite the poor economic condition of her family,
Sheela decided to get a toilet constructed in her house and
became a role model for others. After seeing a toilet made in
her house other women too started demanding
construction of toilets in their houses.
With a population of 2,800, Siyarmau has people
from different communitiesstaying here. 21-year old Sheela
Bai Thakoorcame to the village after her marriage two years
ago. Her family comprising her husband Santosh Thakur
and in-laws totally depends on agriculture. Sanjhi Sehat
meetings in the village brought a change in her life as she
attended all the meetings and listened to every discussion
carefully and followed it.
Says Sheela, 'it was in the 7themtenting of Sanjhi Sehat
that we discussed about the disadvantages of open
defecation. In this meeting I understood how dirty our
residential area was and how much discomfort and disease
prone we were due to open defecation." In the 8themtenting of
Sanjhi Sehat they again discussed on sanitation and after
22
Raisen
this, as a group exercise, all the women walked through the village and saw for themselves how the entire village and
its
surrounding area was turning into an open latrine.
These meetings left a great impact on Sheela's mind. She spoke about this issue with her mother-in-law, Premrani, who
suggested that the PLA Facilitator should also counsel Sheela's father-in-law and husband. Sheela asked PLA Facilitator to talk
to her in laws and husband about the benefits of toilet and disadvantages of open defecation. The PLA Facilitator agreed and
went to Sheela's home and spoke with her family members, She said, 'open defecation is shameful and a blot on our society. It
deprives our womenfolk of their dignity. It can cause infections and diseases. The best solution to avoid spending money on
diseases and treatment is to construct toilets in your house.'
Sheela's husband agreed with the Facilitator but the major stumbling block was finance. But he had to bow down before
Sheela's persistence. They somehow managed to gather the funds for the construction and now she has a toilet in her house.
23
Raisen
Sewage system, proper roads:
Tola is a village, about one km away from Chhind
Savitri, Vinita take the lead
village of Raisen district of Madhya Pradesh. Chhind is
again 30 kms away from block head office Silvani. People
belonging to different communities live there. The tribals of
Tola village were facing several problems due to lack of
sewage system and proper road facility. Due to this, rain
water collected in roads and made transit difficult. This also
became a source of diseases like malaria, dengue and
cholera.
Savitri Bai and her family stay in Tola village and
every year in the rainy season faced many health problems,
but whenever she raised her voice, nobody listened to her.
She felt alone and helpless.
When Sanjhi Sehat project began in the village and
meetings started, the first meeting was on community
partnership. Savitri Bai had found a way out. Savitri told
about the problem of her village to the PLA Facilitator, who
in turn explained how keeping the first meeting in mind,
they could find their own solution. Savitri shared this with
her friend, Vinita, who showed keen interest in cleaning up
the area.
Now Savitri was not alone. She had a friend Vinita
and both tried to get support of other village people but no
one came forward. But they did not lose their confidence
and started working to solve the problem of water deposit
and mud on road. They got soil from near the village and
24
Raisen
started dumping it on the road to fill the puddles and smoothen the roads. Looking at their persistence, gradually the villagers
also started joining in their endeavour.
Now all roads of Tola village are puddle free and there is no water deposit in the lanes. This also checked the breeding of
mosquitoes in the village. Everyone in the village started appreciating Savitri and Vinita's efforts and teamwork. They proved
that where there is a will, there is a way.
25
Sagar
Harsh Kumari's inspired
18 year old Harsh Kumari of Basaa village in Kesli block of
Sagar District in happy. Says a beaming Harsh Kumari,
initiative - 'Drinking
"Now I filter water and keep my house clean." Now my
water for all'
family does not fear illness and we no longer have to pay
regular visits to the doctors. Harsh's drinking water drive,
and cleanliness at home began after her meeting with the
Sanjhi Sehat workers.
She helps her mother in all household chores like,
filling water cleaning utensils, cooking etc. This took much
of her time but when a health worker told her to attend the
Sanjhi Sehat meeting, she became curious and excited as
she wanted to know what new things she could learn. So,
after taking due permission from her mother, she started
attending the health meetings. Harsh says, "It was not easy
to convince mother, but ultimately she had to give in looking
at my insistence."
The discussion and demonstration by the PLA
Facilitator on pure drinking water at the meeting left an
indelible impact on Harsh. She became convinced that
illnesses like vomiting, diarrhea and other stomach related
disease resulted due to unclean drinking water. "We do not
filter water and take out water dunking our hands in the
water utensil. Most often, we don't wash and clean our
hands before using this water. This results in the germs
being transferred from our hands to our stomach, via water,
resulting in all kinds of stomach ailments.
26
Sagar
She went home and first of all asked her father to purchase 'danka' a utensil to take water out of pots etc. Then she
cleaned the pots and filled water after thoroughly washing her hands and filtering it using a thick clean piece of cloth. Now she
laid emphasis on all the family members using the danka for taking water out of the pot for drinking. Harsh's initiative has
convinced her mother also who now attends the Sanjhi Sehat meetings and has vowed to adopt cleaner and healthy practices
for herself and her family.
27
Panna
Sheela on way to
Sheelabai of Rampura village in Pawai block in
Panna district now takes complete care of herself and her
better health
one year old child.
She is a migrant agricultural labour and has to go to
different cities in search of work. This is why she was unable
to take care of her own and her child's health. Her ignorance
added to her woes as she was not aware of the services
provided in the anganwadi centre.
About a year back, she gave birth to a son.
Immediately after the birth, she started working again.
Thus she could neither take proper nutrition nor breastfeed
her son. She would leave for work very early in the day
because of which she could not visit the anganwadi.
When PLA Facilitator went from door to door to
inform villagers about the Sanjhi Sehat meetings, she
noticed a frail and weak Sheelabai and her malnourished
looking son.
Sheelabai informed her how she would often feel
dizzy, weak and suffered from breathlessness after doing
small chores. PLA Facilitator advised her to see a doctor
immediately and asked her to attend the meetings where
she would get information on health and nutrition for both
herself and her son.
She started attending the meetings where she came
to know that she should get her child weighed at regular
intervals. She also came to know that she would get
nutritious food packets every Tuesday from the anganwadi.
She had never visited the anganwadi earlier, SO she
started visiting it every Tuesday. She got her child weighed
28
Panna
and came to know that he was underweight. Soon she started taking the nutrition packets from the anganwadi.
She was advised by PLA Facilitator to give dal water, rice, salad tomatoes, greens etc. to her son and also consume it
herself. Very soon, she became healthier and her son also gained weight after she changed their food habits thanks to the
efforts of Sanjhi Sehat and PLA Facilitator.
29
Raisen
Use of sanitary pads:
Mini sets an example
Sanjhi Sehat programme organised regular meetings in Simariya village of Silvani block in Raisen district of Madhya
Pradesh. These meetings focused on health, nutrition and sanitation related issues.
The 17th meeting at Simariya left a deep impact on 14-year old Mini. Mini like many other girls and women in her village
was not aware of the use of sanitary pads and would use old cloth during her periods as per family tradition.
It
all changed after she became a regular attendee at the Sanjhi Sehat meetings. After the 17th meeting in which menstrual
hygiene and women's health issues was discussed, Mini started taking care of her personal hygiene during her periods. She
realised how using dirty cloth could cause serious infections.
Mini was hesitant to use napkins as she thought napkins were costly and use of it during periods will be an extra burden
on
her family. This thought stopped Mini from using the sanitary pads. One day she asked the PLA Facilitator Archana Pandey
about the cost of pads. The PLA Facilitator told her that a packet of sanitary pads was available at the cost of Rs. 40 and the ASHA
worker would make it available to her. When Mini met the ASHA worker she explained how to use and dispose it, she felt relieved
and bought a packet of sanitary pads from her. Mini says, "when I used the pads for the first time it was a new experience for me
and I felt comfortable and at ease during those difficult days. That motivated me to use the napkins regularly, instead of old cloth
that we used earlier.
Now Mini has become an ardent convert of sanitary pads usage. She has started propagating its use and importance to
other women of the village. Her advice has helped her change the unhygienic practice of using old cloths among many of her
friends. They too have started using sanitary napkins during their menstrual periods.
30
Sheopur
A war against Anaemia
Anaemia is a common problem among most of the women
and young girls of Silpuri - an adiwasi dominated village in
Karahal block of Sheopur district, confirm the aanganwadi
workers and ANM of the Sub - health center in the village.
The PLA Facilitator and the CRP tried to dig out the
reasons behind this health issue during the Sanjhi Sehat
meetings. They spoke at length with the ANM, ASHA and
the aanganwadi workers, as also the villagers. A discussion
with them and the women of the village revealed that the
diet of the villagers was not balanced. They had potatoes and
dal regularly but did there was no intake of vegetables or
fruits in their diet. Moreover, women and girls did not
consume the iron tablets provided by the ANM, ASHA and
the anganwadi worker at their centers. They simply threw
them away. This resulted in low haemoglobin count and
weakness in the women and girls. Once the Sanjhi Sehat
project started in the village, the volunteers decided to take
up the cudgels and start a war against anemia in the village.
They decided to support the women to improve their eating
habits and remove myths and misconceptions about
consuming iron tablets prevalent in the village.
Women were urged to attend the meetings where
they were given information on health, nutrition and
hygiene. Thus began the PLA cycles on nutrition, health and
hygiene. In a discussion on myths and misconceptions
related to consumption of iron tablets, women said they
would felt giddy and nauseated SO they avoided it. The PLA
31
Sheopur
Facilitator patiently explained how it helped the body regain health and to set an example, consumed the tablet herself to prove
her point. This came as a turning point and removed all doubts in the minds of the women.
The meeting proved successful with 13 women vowing to consume IFA tablets daily and made small changes in their
eating habits by including vegetables and greens in their diet. Today, at least half of the women of the village have become free
of anemia.
32
Tikamgarh
Sangeeta fights for her
Sangeeta Devi, belonging to a backward community,
works in a farm. Her family comprising of her husband
children's health
Manvendra, daughters Pragya (2), Ayushi (3), Sakshi (5)
and son (7) depend on agriculture for livelihood. A resident
of Shivpura, village of Jatara block in Tikamgarh district of
Madhya Pradesh, Sangeeta's ever busy schedule included
daily household chores besides working as an agricultural
labour. Her busy schedule left her SO exhausted that she
completely neglected her own health and diet.
Sangeeta says, 'I did not know what malnutrition
was and what I should be doing for the good health of my
children. Many a times, I would have to leave my children
alone at home to go to work. I could hardly take care of my
children's health. She was also completely unaware of the
facilities being provided through the anganwadi centre in
her village.
After the Sanjhi Sehat programme started in the
village, the PLA Facilitator, Meena Ahirvar, called her to a
meeting. In the beginning she refused to go due to her
unending work but on constant urging by Meena, she
agreed to attend one meeting where the session on
children's health was being discussed.
Sangeeta's perception changed after attending the
meeting. She says, 'earlier I thought it was useless to attend
the meeting but I was wrong. When I attended this meeting I
found it very useful.' It was the fourth meeting of Sanjhi
33
Tikamgarh
Sehat in which they discussed hygiene and related diseases. They gave us information about child growth chart and signs of
malnutrition. After listening to the discussion Sangeeta realised that her children were weak and narrated the symptoms of her
children. She asked the PLA Facilitator what she should give her children to improve their health. Meena said that she should
include vegetables in her children's diet like green leafy vegetables freely available in our farms like methi, bathua, rajgeera's
bhaji, spinach, cucumber and other things easily available. Alongside, all the children should be sent to the anganwadi centre
for regular weighing and growth monitoring. Moreover, anganwadi centres also served nutritious food, she was informed.
Acting on Meena's advice, Sangeeta started visiting the anganwadi with all her children. There she got th em weighed.
She came to know that her 2-year old daughter belonged to the yellow circle group. The Anganwadi worker told her that she
should come every Tuesday and get nutritious food (Take Home Ration) for her daughter. She told her to send her children to
the anganwadi daily for cooked breakfast and lunch.
Sangeeta started sending her children to anganwadi regularly and now she has become more aware about giving her
children green vegetables, salad and dal as complete meals. After one month her daughter has come out of yellow circle and is
now is green curve. She and her other brothers and sisters are slowly becoming healthy now.
34
Tikamgarh
Saroj felt as if she was in a nightmare. Her father was
Saroj fights against
insistent upon getting her married at the tender age of 15,
while she wanted to study further. Second among three
child marriage
brothers in her family, Saroj belongs to a backward
community residing in Baisangarh of Baldeogarh
Development block in Tikamgarh district.
Her parents are agriculture labours and work hard
for a living. Conforming to cultural practices in the region,
where early marriages are a social norm, Saroj's father
wanted her to get her married. But Saroj was in no mood.
She was studying in class 10th and wanted to study further.
This resistance led to daily quarrels in the family. But Saroj
refused to budge. She expressed her desire to complete her
graduation before settling down.
Saroj attributes this courage and understanding to
her discussions with the Sanjhi Sehat PLA Facilitator and
the meetings held every fortnight in the village. In one of the
meetings, Ramrati, the PLA Facilitator explained the cycle
(chakra) of malnutrition through picture cards. She
informed the villagers about malnutrition cycle resulting
out of early marriage and conceived conception and
childbirth. It had generally been seen that early marriages
also resulted in multiple births, leading to the woman
becoming weaker and malnourished. Saroj was greatly
influenced by this information. She decided there and then
that she would break this malnutrition cycle and opt for
marriage only after completing her B.A, when she was 20
years old.
35
Tikamgarh
Kannulal, Saroj's father on the other hand started looking for a groom for her as he wanted her to get married the same
year. When Saroj saw that her words fell on deaf ears, she asked for Ramrati's help in this regard and asked her to convince her
father otherwise.
Ramrati came to her rescue and visited Kannulal at his house where she sat down with him and Saroj's mother and told
them about the ill effects of child marriage and cited examples from the village. She also told them how their daughter wished
to study further.
Finally Kannulal gave in to his daughter's wishes, though reluctantly and allowed her to study further.
Saroj has set an example in her village. Other girls in the village are now following suit and quoting Saroj's example to
delay their early marriages and study further.
36
Tikamgarh
Kamla says no to open
Kamla and her family members were habitual to
defecating in the open. They never thought or knew about
defecation
the harmful effects of open defecation. But after attending
Sanjhi Sehat meetings, Kamla realized how harmful open
defecation is for their health. After realizing this she decided
to get a toilet built in her house.
36 year old Kamla lives in Rajnagar village of
Baldevgarh block in Tikamgarh district of Madhya Pradesh.
There are five members in her family including her husband
and three children. Though the family owns agricultural
land, yet it is not sufficient for maintaining their family. So
Kamla and her husband Janki Kushwah work as
agricultural labour in other people's lands. Though she is
herself unlettered, Kamla and her husband are very
concerned about the education of their children and that is
why all her three children are enrolled in the school and she
ensures that they attend school daily.
It is this love for learning new things which
motivated Kamla to start attending the Sanjhi Sehat
meetings. Even after a hard day's work in the field and
attending the household chores, she would be prompt in
attending the meetings. It was in the PLA session on hygiene
and use of toilets that Kamla came to know about the
harmful effects of open defecation and the importance of
using toilets.
Sanjhi Sehat PLA Facilitator's, words about
avoiding open defecation made a deep impression on
37
Tikamgarh
Kamla. She invited the facilitator to come and speak with her husband on this issue. The facilitator took out time and went to
meet Kamla and her husband, Janki. She discussed with them about the use of toilet and they said that, 'their family members
were used to open defecation, although they faced many problems. They had to wait for it to become dark at night SO that Kamla
and her daughter could relieve themselves. This practice had bred a feeling of shame and insecurity in them, which they
wanted to get rid off.
The Sanjhi Sehat PLA Facilitator explained to them and the villagers about hygiene, sanitation and ills of open
defecation. After listening to her they felt that it was essential to build a toilet in their house. Kamla and her husband decided to
take the initiative and construct a toilet in their house. For the construction of toilet they arranged the materials themselves.
They both started buildingthe toilet, brick by brick. With persistence and hard work, they finished building the toilet in a week.
They also made a hand washing unit with toilet.
As Kamla and Janki narrate in one voice, 'Finally we have our own toilet in our house and every family member uses it.
After using the toilet, we wash our hands with soap in the hand washing unit. This is also a new practice for us.' Kamla is
thankful that she does not have to go out in the open at night. Her family is free from open defecation, dirt and disease.
38
Panna
A New life for Namisha
For Choti Bai and her family of four which included
her husband and her three children, life was not a bed of
roses.Living in a small village, Kaldgaon, located 80 kms
from from Panna district headquarters, Choti Bai and her
husband are agricultural labour by profession. The couple
work hard all day and managed to survive somehow. Sheer
poverty was making it very difficult for the family to make
both ends meet. Choti Bai, could not bear to see her children
suffer. Her sons were grown up but Nimisha, her one and a
half year old daughter was the worst affected as her mother
could not take care of her. But when she came to know about
the NRC and the services it offered, she was prompt to avail
of its services and get her daughter admitted for 14 days in it.
Choti Bai came to know about the Sanjhi Sehat meetings in
the village from her neighbours. These meetings for women
focused on health nutrition sanitation and hygiene issues
for women and children. Curiosity and the desire to seek
better health for her children drove Choti Bai to start
attending the meetings regularly. In the fourth meeting, the
villagers were given information about getting their
children's weight measured and how proper intake of food
and nutrition was important to maintain a healthy life and
keep malnourishment at bay.
The PLA Facilitator and the Community Resource
Person also helped her understand how her infant daughter
weighed just six kgs and was malnourished. She was guided
to the anganwadi centre, where help was at hand for her
39
Panna
small daughter. The aanganwadi worker took the weight of her child and explained how malnourished her child was with the
help of charts. She counselled Choti Bai to tell her husband and decided to take Namisha to the Nutrition Resource Centre for
treatment and management of malnourishment.
Very soon, her treatment at the NRC began. Proper medicines and food were given to Choti Bai's daughter for 14 days in
the NRC and she was counselled on how to take care of her daughter's meals after she went home. Slowly her daughter started
regaining her weight and health. A visibly happy and satisfied mother, Choti Bai says, she is happy to see her daughter healthy
and free of malnourishment and thanks the Sanjhi Sehat Facilitator who showed her the way to anganwadi centre where she
found the solution to her daughter's ailment.
40
Ek Pahal : Sehat Ki Or
Acknowledgements
Rachna Singh
Suparna Sarkar
Anjali Agarwal
Sunita N. Sharma
Seema Vyas
Richa Agrawal
All District Coordinators
3050 260
Printed by : Goenka Offset Printers Pvt. Ltd. Indore. Ph.: 2412800
